Update to Feature doc gradients limiters (#99)
su2code/su2code.github.io: _docs_v7/Slope-Limiters-and-Shock-Resolution.md

### Godunov's Theorem
The question of "How accurate can a TVD scheme be?" is still unanswered. For this, we turn to [Godunov's Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Godunov%27s_theorem).

**Godunov's Theorem**: 
1. A linear scheme is monotone if and only if it is total variation diminishing. 
2. Linear total variation diminishing schemes are at most first-order accurate. 

The first statement is simple, stating that for linear schemes, the characteristic of being monotone and TVD is equivalent. The second statement is more interesting. It states that if we want to construct a linear TVD (monotone) scheme, the best we can be possibly hope for is first-order accuracy. 

Recall that the original motivation for a slope limiter was to prevent the formation of oscillations in the solution. In the section above, we noted that TVD schemes are monotonicity preserving (a favorable property in resolving a shock). However, through Godunov's theorem, we note that if we also want high-order accuracy, **our TVD discretization MUST be nonlinear**

The inclusion of a slope limiter into a TVD scheme accomplishes this idea. 

> 
> 
> <!-- ??? do we need to include def of venkat function??? -->
> <!-- It would make more sense to include the limiters in the section above -->
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Available Limiter Options

The field `SLOPE_LIMITER_FLOW` in the `.cfg` file specifies which limiter to use. Note that this option is only used if `MUSCL_FLOW = YES` (which specifies to use a second-order method).
The [Laminar Cylinder](https://su2code.github.io/tutorials/Laminar_Cylinder/) shows an example of this.

> The [Turbulent Flat Plate example](https://su2code.github.io/tutorials/Turbulent_Flat_Plate/) sets `SLOPE_LIMITER_TURB`, which is used for the turbulence equations, rather than for the flow equations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Turbulent Flat Plate example](https://su2code.github.io/tutorials/Turbulent_Flat_Plate/) sets `SLOPE_LIMITER_TURB`, which is used for the turbulence equations (if `MUSCL_TURB = YES`), rather than for the flow equations.
```

More possible applications of limiters are listed below.

### Slope Limiter Fields

| Configuration Field | Description | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `SLOPE_LIMITER_FLOW` | Flow equations | Need `MUSCL_FLOW = YES` |
| `SLOPE_LIMITER_TURB` | Turbulence equations | Need `MUSCL_TURB = YES` |
| `SLOPE_LIMITER_SPECIES` | Species evolution equations | Need `MUSCL_SPECIES = YES` |
| `SLOPE_LIMITER_ADJFLOW` | Adjoint flow equations | Need `MUSCL_ADJFLOW = YES` |
| `SLOPE_LIMITER_ADJTURB` | Adjoint turbulence equations | Need `MUSCL_ADJTURB = YES` |

> <!-- 
> CLimiterDetails.hpp:
> computeLimiters.hpp uses computeLimiters_impl.hpp and really just sets the limiter
> computeLimiters_impl.hpp passes computation of field values (cell averages), gradients, and  to the limiter
> also check out
> computeGradientsGreenGauss.hpp (and the least squares one)
>  -->
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

| Type | Description | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `NONE`                  | No limiter                                      |  |
| `BARTH_JESPERSEN`       | Barth-Jespersen                                 | This limiter is a smooth version of the commonly seen Barth-Jespersen limiter seen in the literature  |
| `VENKATAKRISHNAN`       | Venkatakrishnan                                 |  |
| `VENKATAKRISHNAN_WANG`  | Venkatakrishnan-Wang                            |  |
| `SHARP_EDGES`           | Venkatakrishnan with sharp-edge modification    | This limiter should not be used for flow solvers |
| `WALL_DISTANCE`         | Venkatakrishnan with wall distance modification | This limiter should not be used for flow solvers |
| `VAN_ALBADA_EDGE`       | Van Albada (edge formulation)                   | This limiter is only implemented for flow solvers and does not output limiter values when using the VOLUME_OUTPUT option |

The default limiter is `VENKATAKRISHNAN`.

### Limiter Parameters and Further Details

The `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` parameter is generally a small constant, defaulting to $$0.05$$, but its specific definition depends on the limiter being used.

> For the `VENKATAKRISHNAN`, `SHARP_EDGES`, and `WALL_DISTANCE` limiters, the `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` parameter refers to $$K$$ in $$\epsilon^2=\left(K\bar{\Delta} \right)^3$$, where $$\bar{\Delta}$$ is an average grid size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the `VENKATAKRISHNAN`, `SHARP_EDGES`, and `WALL_DISTANCE` limiters, the `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` parameter refers to $$K$$ in $$\epsilon^2=\left(K\bar{\Delta} \right)^3$$, where $$\bar{\Delta}$$ is an average grid size (this is hardcoded as 1m and thus all tuning is via $$K$$).
```

The $$K$$ parameter defines a threshold, below which oscillations are not damped by the limiter, as described by [Venkatakrishnan](https://doi.org/10.1006/jcph.1995.1084).
Thus, a large value will approach the case of using no limiter with undamped oscillations, while too small of a value will slow the convergence and add extra diffusion.
The SU2 implementation of the `BARTH_JESPERSEN` limiter actually uses `VENKATAKRISHNAN` with $$K=0$$.
**Note:** the value of `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` depends on both the mesh and the flow variable and thus should be reduced if the mesh is refined.

When using the `VENKATAKRISHNAN_WANG` limiter, `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` is instead $$\varepsilon '$$ in $$\varepsilon = \varepsilon ' (q_{max} - q_{min})$$, where $$q_{min}$$ and $$q_{max}$$ are the respective *global* minimum and maximum of the field variable being limited.

> Note that this global operation may incur extra time costs due to communication between MPI threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This global operation incurs extra time costs due to communication between MPI ranks.
```

Other than the addition of this geometric factor, these limiters are the same as the `VENKATAKRISHNAN` limiter and should also use `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` (given by $$K$$ below).

Specifically, given the distance to the feature, $$d_{\text{feature}}$$, an intermediate measure of the distance, $$d$$, is calculated. The parameter $$c$$ is set by `ADJ_SHARP_LIMITER_COEFF`.
<!-- ??? Might need to change notation here. Couldn't find any resources, so I chose my own notation.??? -->

$$ d(d_{\text{feature}}; c, K) = \frac{d_{\text{feature}}} { (c \cdot K \bar{\Delta}) } - 1$$

Then, the geometric factor is given by

$$ \gamma (d) = \frac{1}{2} (1+d+\sin(\pi \cdot d)/ \pi) $$

Note that the geometric factor is nonnegative and nondecreasing in $$d_{feature}$$.

After the number of iterations given by `LIMITER_ITER` (default $$999999$$), the value of the limiter will be frozen.

The option `FROZEN_LIMITER_DISC` tells whether the slope limiter is to be frozen in the discrete adjoint formulation (default is `NO`).

 

> <!-- We can specify which limiters are applied through the fields
> constexpr size_t MAXNVAR = 32; -->
> <!-- 
> ???Should I mention some possible errors???
> 
> SU2_MPI::Error("Too many dimensions to compute limiters.", CURRENT_FUNCTION);
> SU2_MPI::Error("Unknown limiter type.", CURRENT_FUNCTION);
> 
>   constexpr size_t MAXNVAR = 32;
> 
>   if (varEnd > MAXNVAR)
>     SU2_MPI::Error("Number of variables is too large, increase MAXNVAR.", CURRENT_FUNCTION);
> 
>  -->
> 

Reviewer: No need to mention it because it's not something a user can do anything about.
```suggestion
```

---
title: Slope Limiters and Shock Resolution
permalink: /docs_v7/Slope-Limiters-and-Shock-Resolution/
---

This page lists the limiters available in SU2 and their associated options, it is not meant as a detailed theory guide but a brief review of the governing mathematics is presented. 
The options listed here do not apply to the high order DG solver.

---

- [Theory: An introduction to slope limiters](#theory-an-introduction-to-slope-limiters)
  - [Total Variation and Total Variation Diminishing](#total-variation-and-total-variation-diminishing)
  - [Godunov's Theorem](#godunovs-theorem)
- [Available Limiter Options](#available-limiter-options)
  - [Slope Limiter Fields](#slope-limiter-fields)
  - [Available Limiters](#available-limiters)
  - [Limiter Parameters and Further Details](#limiter-parameters-and-further-details)
- [Empirical comparison of limiters on a periodic advective domain](#empirical-comparison-of-limiters-on-a-periodic-advective-domain)

---

## Theory: An introduction to slope limiters

> For many studying compressible flow or high-speed aerodynamics, the formation of shock discontinuities are a common occurrence. The use of high-order numerical schemes are desired to resolve these regions as the strength of the shock largely governs the behavior of the downstream flowfield. However, linear high-resolution schemes often result in numerical oscillations near the shock due to high-frequency content associated with the shock. These oscillations can result in non-physical values (e.g. negative density) that greatly degrade the accuracy of your solution and pollute the domain. An example of this phenomena is shown below with the Lax-Wendroff scheme for scalar advection. Although the Lax-Wendroff method is second-order, note that it introduces numerical oscillations that result in the state value of $$u$$ becoming negative. 

Reviewer 2: Figures were created using a script generated in MATLAB. Figure captions and relevant paragraphs were updated to include this information.

<!-- 
CLimiterDetails.hpp:
computeLimiters.hpp uses computeLimiters_impl.hpp and really just sets the limiter
computeLimiters_impl.hpp passes computation of field values (cell averages), gradients, and  to the limiter
also check out
computeGradientsGreenGauss.hpp (and the least squares one)
 -->

The `SLOPE_LIMITER_` options above may each be changed to use different limiters, which are listed and explained below.

**Note:** the Discontinuous-Galerkin methods (DG) / Higher-order methods (HOM) do not use limiters.

### Available Limiters

| Type | Description | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `NONE`                  | No limiter                                      |  |
| `BARTH_JESPERSEN`       | Barth-Jespersen                                 |  |
| `VENKATAKRISHNAN`       | Venkatakrishnan                                 |  |
| `VENKATAKRISHNAN_WANG`  | Venkatakrishnan-Wang                            |  |
| `SHARP_EDGES`           | Venkatakrishnan with sharp-edge modification    | This limiter should not be used for flow solvers |
| `WALL_DISTANCE`         | Venkatakrishnan with wall distance modification | This limiter should not be used for flow solvers |

> | `VAN_ALBADA_EDGE`       | Van Albada (edge formulation)                   | This limiter has been observed to not output limiter values when called using VOLUME_OUTPUT |

Reviewer: That's because it is computed for each edge, instead of each node, and thus cannot be output directly.

<!-- ??? Van Albada. It's possible that we actually have this backward and Van Albada is the only limiter that works for other solvers??? -->

> <!-- We're currently investigating if Barth-Jespersen is Venkat with K=0 -->

Reviewer: Van Albada is only implemented for flow solvers.
Currently, it is. However, that is inconsistent with the literature http://tetra.mech.ubc.ca/ANSLab/publications/michalak2008.pdf

The default limiter is `VENKATAKRISHNAN`.

### Limiter Parameters and Further Details

The `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` parameter is generally a small constant, defaulting to $$0.05$$, but its specific definition depends on the limiter being used.

> This is different than the small constant used to prevent division by zero, which is used in all these limiters.
> <!-- ^ I'm refering to: `static Type epsilon() {return std::numeric_limits<passivedouble>::epsilon();}` in CLimiterDetails.hpp -->

Reviewer: This is a numerical implementation detail and can be ignored here I think
```suggestion
```

> For the `VENKATAKRISHNAN`, `SHARP_EDGES`, and `WALL_DISTANCE` limiters, the `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` parameter refers to $$K$$ in $$\epsilon^2=\left(K\bar{\Delta} \right)^3$$, where $$\bar{\Delta}$$ is an average grid size.

Reviewer: This is another inconsistency we have with the literature, I think in the original Venkatakrishan paper a local grid size is used (based on the volume of the CV).

Reviewer: I was wrong, the original reference uses an average size for all Cvs, it was in a different paper that I saw a local reference for each Cv https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/abs/10.2514/6.2022-1374

The $$K$$ parameter defines a threshold, below which oscillations are not damped by the limiter, as described by [Venkatakrishnan](https://doi.org/10.1006/jcph.1995.1084).
Thus, a large value will approach the case of using no limiter with undamped oscillations, while too small of a value will slow the convergence and add extra diffusion.

> This value depends on both the mesh and the flow variable and thus should be reduced if the mesh is refined.

Reviewer: This is a very good observation that not many people follow.
```suggestion
**Note:** This value depends on both the mesh and the flow variable and thus should be reduced if the mesh is refined.
```

<!-- maybe change wording from flow variable to "field variable being limited" -->

<!-- ??? should we include the definition of the venkat limiter (Delta -, Delta +, eps function) from the paper ??? -->

> <!-- ^^^ then we would also need to define Delta - and Delta +, which gets tricky. -->

Reviewer: I think it is fine to just leave the reference for further reading.

<!-- ??? should this section on Ref_Elem_Length be included ??? -->
<!-- so, \bar{\Delta} is actually config.GetRefElemLength(), which refers to RefElemLength -->
Similarly, the parameter `REF_ELEM_LENGTH` controls $$\bar{\Delta}$$, but the behavior of the limiter should be controlled through `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF`.

> The `REF_ELEM_LENGTH` parameter is also used in the geometric factor of the `SHARP_EDGES` and `WALL_DISTANCE` limiters.

Reviewer: This option no longer exists, we lump the reference length and limiter constant in the same setting.

When using the `VENKATAKRISHNAN_WANG` limiter, `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` is instead $$\varepsilon '$$ in $$\varepsilon = \varepsilon ' (q_{max} - q_{min})$$, where $$q_{min}$$ and $$q_{max}$$ are the respective *global* minimum and maximum of the field variable being limited.
Note that this global operation may incur extra time costs due to communication between MPI threads.

> The original work by [Wang](https://doi.org/10.2514/6.1996-2091) suggests using `VENKAT_LIMITER_COEFF` in the range of $$[0.01, 0.20]$$, where again larger values approach the case of using no limiter.

Reviewer: An important note here is that this limiter is independent of non-dimensionalization whereas the Venkatakrishan limiter should only be used in non-dimensional mode, otherwise the pressure and temperature will generally be limited more aggressively than velocity.

Author: Added some comments about this in [a8a7cb2](https://github.com/su2code/su2code.github.io/pull/99/commits/a8a7cb283edad7ce415bb40d543be2fa80905d14)

The `NONE`, `BARTH_JESPERSEN`, `VENKATAKRISHNAN`, and `VENKATAKRISHNAN_WANG` limiter options all have no **geometric modifier**.
A geometric modifier increases limiting near walls or sharp edges. This is done by multiplying the limiter value by a **geometric factor**. 

For both the `SHARP_EDGES` and `WALL_DISTANCE` limiters, the influence of the geometric modifier is controlled with `ADJ_SHARP_LIMITER_COEFF` which defaults to 3.0.
**Note:** these limiters should not be used for flow solvers.

> <!-- ??? If they're not used for flow solvers, when are they used? Just for adjoints, or also for Turbulent equations or species ???-->

Reviewer: Correct, continuous adjoints to be more specific.
